The Lilly Library, yeah.
Would you order, if you order... See the collection of bindings.
The bindings, and ask to see the bindings of the opposite of the Doney book.
Okay.
I'll tell you why.
There was a, a squash dealer had people do them.
a series of them, they were going to sell them.
And then Randall, who was then the head man there, bought them all, and they're all in the Loyola Library.
I've got pictures of them.
I'm going to get to Columbia, are you?
That's another place I want to get to you.
Not this trip.
Love to see that film.
I guess I'd just like to talk a little bit about
What makes a person collect?
I don't know.
I think they have to be a little mad.
You think so?
Yeah.
Well, I think I can say for us that she had collected... I had collected one man, a poet in England.
But I had four or five books.
And which poet was that?
Yeah, I can't give you his name.
Okay, let's go.
Yeah, the one who wrote about him.
Okay.
Yeah, and she had collected, well, you tell me.
Houseman.
Oh, A.E.
Yeah, that's what I had.
Good for you.
But that was all.
And she had collected...
My so-called... I kept one.
I went to an auction sale when he was away, once a small one.
He was hyped up at a present.
And I came home with a book which absolutely I had no interest in and anything else.
It was a little large form of book.
And I have kept that book to teach me never to bid up at an auction.
It's in here.
Never to bid you kept that to teach you to never... Why?
Oh, it was a silly book.
No, I really didn't need it or want it, but it was carried away.
No, it was just a book.
Did you spend a lot of money for it?
In those days, it was considered a lot.
Yeah, but you wanted it.
No, well, I don't know why I couldn't, but I had it, and I didn't really, well, we didn't really want, but it's around the Attacad.
And remember, don't bid.
But you've gotten a lot of pleasure from the collection over the years?
Oh, yes.
How do you, tell me if you can, if you can articulate it, how a collection like this gives you pleasure?
Even Mr. Rosenthal or Mrs. Rosenthal.
Well, I like to sit down now and then, pull down a book and look it over and remember when I got it and how we got it.
Whether I like it.
Some of them you don't, you get, you don't like after a few years.
I had that.
Sam doesn't agree with me.
We had a Haggadah we got from Zeke.
And I thought it was great.
And a year later, I couldn't look at the thing.
And I still don't like it.
So, I mean, it's a matter of... You have to live with things for a while before you really know whether you like them or not.
What are you going to say?
Well, you know, why don't I study it?
First you buy books to read, and then if you like them very much and they come out in a different fashion, you may want to have that.
But over a period, then you wish you'd bought some book, and you try to get them.
And gradually it becomes a disease.
It becomes a disease.
That's what it is.
To the extent that you feel you have to have something.
No, you'd like very much to have them.
And if they were up to a certain price, we'd buy them.
Have you ever gone over what you thought you should be doing?
I'm afraid so.
I'll say it again.
Have you ever spent more than you thought you should?
Yes.
On the 1970 bindings of French bindings, we became very enamored of them.
And we would take them
And we didn't have to pay for them immediately.
They'd bill us later.
We could either take them or they'd ship them.
And when it added up, well, I've been looking at it now.
I don't know how we did it.
And we didn't do other things, and we had the book.
And then it becomes really a disease.
We don't buy very much now.
There's no way to play it.
In other words, you deprive yourself of other comforts, shall we say.
That's right.
Not comfort.
No, things that you do or not do.
But you never regret, I gather, getting the books.
No, I regret the books I didn't get.
Really, you regret the books you didn't get.
It's true.
I mean, we should have gotten it.
I get very conservative every now and now.
Yeah, we won't tell you about the book.
But in several instances, and then we had him, and then it comes out in his business.
So the thing about this collection is you both share the passion.
You see, there are a lot of collectors whose wives think they're crazy, you know?
But what's great about this, I think, is that
You enjoy this collection as a couple.
That goes so well.
There have been books that she wanted to buy that I didn't give a damn whether we had.
And I came to like them very much, and vice versa.
At the same time, there aren't too many books that we bought that we regret.
I gather if there's a focus, it's that you love books that are beautiful.
I mean, it seems to me that... If they're well printed.
If they're well printed, you're buying books as works of art, it seems to me.
Is that correct?
You are.
Well, we did a lot of reading.
We still do.
But we didn't care whether it was a first edition or anything.
And I think first editions are for the birds.
So you've never sought out first editions?
I did before I knew what I was doing.
Really?
So you think that's a foolish enterprise?
No, I don't.
Not for those who like to do it.
If you're doing research.
A first edition is very important.
Like for instance Whitman, he kept changing things.
So did Thoreau and Melville.
That's the point that people forget.
They want first editions.
First editions are important when it's a second edition.
But the second edition has changes from the first.
But a second printing, which people take for as against a first printing,
Well, taking Scott Tirog's books as a book, you'd get just as much from the third printing of the book, because he never changed it.
If they change it in an edition.
Now, Melville, they did, and that's why— They changed the title.
That was published in England first as The Whale.
And then it became Moby Dick.
Actually, those were different books.
We've had a collator here at Newberry, and we've compared them.
He changed them on the second printing.
So that's a different book.
So textually they change, and therefore they become more of your signature.
Yeah.
That, to me, they're important, but that you've got the word.
Where there are—look at that aircraft up there.
They're up—if there's a difference in the printing.
For instance, they put in most books today, you know, first printing, second.
third printing.
If all that is is a reprint, there shouldn't be any difference in the value of it.
So therefore it has no interest to you as a collector or as an artifact.
Yes, no.
I guess what I'm driving at is that the content, though you both love to read and you both do read, when it comes to collecting books, it's not really...
What is written in them that makes it interesting to you as an object?
Well, that is completely so with bindings.
Now, we have bindings, which are books that have Modigliani, things in it, and lots of the others in the books.
I was looking at a binding that we got, and I blessed the book.
It was a privately printed book.
I've got a key roast one.
If I'd read this first, I wouldn't even have bought it.
It was such a stupid story.
It was a French book.
Okay.
I'm just trying to see if I have any other things I wanted to ask you.
You mentioned that you, when we chatted on the phone, that you knew John Fleming.
Oh, sure.
What did you think of him as a dialect?
We never dealt with him.
Oh, is that right?
No, we've been with him.
And he wasn't our kind of a—no, there was a fellow in New York who knew more about books than he did.
He felt douche-ness.
Yeah, douche-ness.
Douche-ness.
We never made a mistake with douche-ness.
But the other man really didn't know as much, but he knew.
But he had a man that's still collecting.
that they got a list of the best first editions the land should have.
And the Grolier Club has given lists of things, you know, books early on.
Well, we didn't do that.
I say first editions are like olives.
You become accustomed to them.
I think with Blimey, it's a question of
Personalities.
With Fleming, it's a question of personalities, yeah.
First editions are like columns.
I just want to get that.
You've become accustomed to them, right?
It's great.
But, Phil, we had—Phil was not easy to get along with, but he had—he knew an awful lot about books.
So did Lucian Goldsmith.
We got things through him.
We have, you know, the story of a kind of just, you know,
Bruce Rogers was a famous man in American printing and what he's done.
Who is now?
Bruce Rogers.
Oh, that's right.
And he did the most famous Bible of this century, the Oxford Bible.
And it's considered a great book.
And people have bought it, and the price has gone everywhere.
And we saw it when some of it hadn't been bound, and we said, we'll wait.
So then once Phil called us and said he had one that had been bound by a man that I...
New York, a German who had come over.
And he had gotten it.
It's all in one volume.
And I had the first chance at it, and he said, a price.
If you won't quote the price, I'll tell you, okay?
Five hundred dollars.
And that was just a little more
than the price was going then for the unbound.
And now they're way up because the crown has taken all the ones that weren't done and keeping them and binds them for men who come to England like books if they want to give them a gift.
Whether they've used them up now, I don't know.
But he told me he had this, and he said, You've been waiting on the book.
I'd buy it.
I did.
So things go on.
But not only did the value go up, but I was walking down Fifth Avenue with another dealer who, after his death,
I've liked very much.
And he said, you know, you were talking about your Bible.
I heard an interesting thing that Bruce Rogers was over there, and he saw them, and he saw a limitation in them.
And he said, there aren't any.
nobody's seen one except those books.
And he said, I think you told me that yours had a limitation page.
I said, that's the way I remember it.
So, well, he said, look at it.
I looked, and there it was.
This is number 31.
I'll show it to you if you want to see it.
And, uh, uh,
Then I was talking to Alan Fern.
He was then at the Library of Congress.
I said, Alan, do any of your Rogers Bibles have this in it?
He said, no, but we've got a big one.
that 30 people paid $1,000 apiece to have their name put on something in it.
And that's the larger one.
I said, sure, I know that one.
That's the one that Rogers had planned to give to you.
But as usual, he got hired up for money.
And so when he had it done, he had that added.
so that you've got it, and that's an uncut one.
The other one is, there aren't any.
I said, well, look again at yours.
And he called back, they haven't.
I said, well, I've got one.
Mine's number 31.
The reason I looked, because I never have cared about that.
Phil had told me about it.
No, this other man had told me about it.
Well, I had looked and I thought I had got it.
And there it is.
I guess one other question and then I'll take my leave.
Is it important to you that these books stay together?
No.
No, except for the...
except for the Offitina-Badoni books, Marla Sykes books.
And they'll go to all of them, that they've got some, and if they'll pick the better ones of them,
To the Newbury.
What?
They go to the Newbury.
So now, what, are you going to allow them to come and make their choice?
Oh, sure.
I mean, you've stipulated this.
They know it.
And the others know it.
The family knows it.
They don't know about any of the other stuff now.
What we may do, well, we've got a book that's going on exhibit now.
It's a book we bought at a sale in London.
And Jim Wells over there, he was then the head of the Wing Collection.
And I had a way of bidding on the same book.
And...
by having the same person bid for it.
You know, how could we do that?
It doesn't seem right when they want the book and I want the book.
You both have your limits, I guess, and you tell them.
Well, that's what it always was that we wrote down on a piece of paper what we'd be willing to pay.
And it was always that he...
want to pay less.
Well, there came this time, and I hope that, I don't know, I think it's been forgotten, this is just a story, that after they came, he wanted mine more than his.
Well, today, and today he'd want his.
He'd want the hours for them, but the reason for that is a funny one, that I'd have got it, and there were seven done this way, remarkably done, a modern illumination by a woman in about 1904, between there and there.
There were seven of those.
Each was different, done differently by her.
And he saw a Mags catalog.
That's what bid for us.
Oh, Mags was the one who bid for the two of you.
Well, on the books.
The lower one, if it came to the lower price.
Was it Ryan Mags that did this one?
Yes.
But on this one, I think we had.
And on one of them, he wanted a change.
And I think this was the one.
that he wanted to change, the book that I would have bought.
He changed his bit.
Yeah, but what do you think I saw?
I think the book was about $400 or some dollars.
And how much do you think it was sold for three years ago and probably would be more now by mags in their catalog?
I wouldn't even have to guess.
$20,000?
125,000 pounds.
You know it's not realistic.
Pounds.
And what was the book now?
Can you tell me?
Do you remember what it was?
What?
Do you remember what the book?
Do you mean the little one, the one I made the box for?
Yeah.
Where it is?
125,000 pounds.
No, it isn't there, Mary Louise.
That's down just there with them.
It's the Ashantine book.
Oh, that thing.
What is it?
Ashen Dean.
Ashen Dean?
Yes.
Ashen Dean, the Songs of Solomon.
And Ashen Dean is what, a binding?
No, a printer, a hand-pressed printer like Martin Schott.
They're having this show at the Art Institute at the library there.
We sent three books.
What is so extraordinary about that book?
That somebody would pay 125,000 pounds for it, I wonder.
It was printed on parchment.
And she illuminated it like the before printing books were written.
I see.
And she had beautiful stuff on parchment.
And how old is it?
1904, the book.
Ashen Dean.
That's one word or two.
One word.
A-S-H-E-N-D-E-A-N.
E.
And that's the name of the art?
The Press.
No, no.
This is the Songs of Solomon.
I understand, but Ash and Dean is the name of it.
Yeah, that's right.
The Press.
It's quite a well-known one.
And it's Songs of Solomon.
That's wonderful.
And you have that?
Or that's on loan, I guess, for an exhibit?
It's on loan.
That's on loan right now.
We'd show it to you if we did.
And so is that a book that you'll ultimately, you think, give to the Newbery?
Well, we have many thoughts.
We have agreed to, but the
Yes, we agreed to do that.
Some of, one or two of our grandchildren are slightly interested in books.
Yeah.
You mean to own them?
To have them.
Well, that's nice.
Same thing.
To have to own them.
Well, you hope that maybe they don't sell them, though, you know?
I don't think so.
You know, like Bradley Martin's books were sold within months of his, you know, when he...
I went to the sale in New York, the Bradley Martin's sale.
What are you looking for?
Nothing I'd ask for about a show.
Here's the book.
I'll look at this book and then I'll take my leave.
What one is that?
This is the Monet.
He's got very popular Monet.
Oh, that's quite wonderful.
We bought a lot of them because we liked them.
This is French, right?
Yeah, this is French.
It's a French book.
And we bought a number of his because we liked it.
Oh, I can smell it.
You could get them pretty well like a song.
And then there was a big... I'm just looking at the title.
It's... Which one is that?
14?
That's T-R-A-I-N... That's 8, M-I...
And it's bound by, and how do you spell this?
B-O-N-E-T.
He never bound a book himself.
No.
He designed them and had people bind them.
No, he designed the binding.
Oh, excuse me.
Well, this one would probably work more because it's got all sorts of things in it.
But it's really the binding, of course, which makes it.
Yeah.
Well, a few years ago,
There was a big thing when a South American bought a whole one of this manuals.
Is that the Argentine?
Yeah.
Priscilla Juvelas was the one who went down with Fleming and they bought it.
Yeah, she was one of them.
She's a bitch, in my opinion.
Really?
I don't like her and I don't think she knows much about books, but she got it with him.
And they did it.
Well, these books, this thing,
sold for, I mean, the ones that Bonet did, those were the ones that brought the highest price.
Now, I don't know what we, wait, yeah.
Now, from the way they spent to pay it, you know how much we paid for this book when we bought it?
We bought it in January 73.
Now, we were paying lots of money, too.
We paid $800 in the way they had it.
They got for the book for South America.
This one would probably have been one of their most valuable books.
So what do you think?
What?
What do you think it would go for today?
Oh, I don't know.
I would say that it would begin
No, if anybody's foolish enough to pay with the dead, they'd pay half a million dollars for it.
For that book?
Yeah.
No, for the binding.
For that binding?
For that one binding?
Sure.
Half a million dollars?
Yeah.
I think that's what they paid for some of Bonnet's.
This is an early one.
And we had a lot of them.
You know why we bought them?
No, why?
We didn't care about who the binder was.
We liked the binding.
But what has happened over the last 17 years to make these French bindings take off like this?
Well, they were good.
They were colorful.
And they set it for all of Europe.
They set a stamp.
And he set it.
See, he'd been a designer of ladies' clothing.
That's wonderful.
I mean, I've really tell you, now that book, this book isn't worth any more to us.
And the funny thing is we have a little one that he did near death, the last one, a little bit of a one.
He uses the same color combination as he did in this.
I mean, this is just one.
This is a little book like I've shown to the moon.
But...
What do you say?
You know, everybody will tell you about the books they got, how valuable they can, but they don't tell you of the ones that are worthless.
I think I'm going to quit on that one, sir.
That's a good line.
They'll tell you about how great the books are, but they won't tell you about the ones that are worthless.
That's right.
Mr. Rosenthal, you've been very, very generous with your time.
What I was going to show you is terrible.
And we had one, and we never bought another one.
You've heard about the jewel bindings?
No.
Well, let me show you one.
And now... A jewel binding?
Yeah.
That's the Lady of the Lake, I can see, by Sir Walter Scott.
We're standing over by the window overlooking Lake Michigan.
Here.
Oh, God.
See there?
See this?
What is this date from?
What?
This is old?
No, this is fairly new, Sangorsky.
Sounds good.
That got for another one.
People are spending lots of money for it.
We just want it.
one of these books we got it cheap and I... You've erased out the price there.
No, that was the price of the book originally.
What do you call this?
What kind of a binding?
A jewel binding.
By anyone in particular?
Well, this one was done by
S-A-N-G-O-R-S-K-I-N-S-U-T-C-L-I-F-F-E of London.
Yeah.
And these actually have jewels in them.
Yeah, there are jewels.
Not here, but you see these are all inlays.
These are different colored leather that they use.
And, uh, but here you see that you see them here.
Are these precious jewels or semi-precious jewels?
No.
Oh, I don't know what all of them are.
Did you get that in this country or abroad?
No, we bought this in this country.
I think.
How old would you say it is?
Is it the 20th century?
Oh, no, these are 20th century.
The book.
Well, it's Lady of the Lake by Sir Walter Scott.
Yeah.
The book is 1863.
1863.
Is that the first printing, or is that a... No, I don't know.
I don't say here.
No, I don't think that's... It may be involved.
No, we had bought one of them.
Let's see, when did we get this book?
Well, I can't be sure.
It's okay.
But, uh, but I don't—I wouldn't buy another.
You wouldn't buy another?
No.
But you have one.
Even if I didn't have one.
Yeah.
Oh, that Roger thing?
Yeah, how did—oh, there was a sale of a man, and you bought it.
You picked this, didn't you?
I'm not that one.
I don't think.
The ladies— That jewel thing?
What?
That jewel?
Thank you.
I never picked that.
Okay.
I'm going to take my leave now, Mrs. Rosenthal.
It was a very interesting having you here.
Thank you very much for your hospitality.
I don't know.
We didn't do very much for it.
Well, you gave me your time, and that's the most precious thing anybody has, really.
I don't know how you describe this collection.
Myth much.
Yeah, but it's got an identity, doesn't it?
Where?
Well, it's the Rosenfall collection.
Do you see it as that?
No, I don't really.
Well, I don't know what this one is, but here's a modern French one.
I love that.
It's so nice.
And after that junky thing up there with all the jewels, I think it's kind of... Yeah, this is nice from here.
Look at that.
This is so smooth.
You know who's done the etchings in here?
Oh, God, it's so smooth.
It's like that.
No Giacometti.
Giacometti, I mean.
Giacometti.
Yeah.
Well, that's exquisite.
And so on.
Oops, I'm sorry.
And who is the binder in this?
Oh, that's a French one.
These were, this French man.
I think it's Rouet.
Who was getting binders on the way.
Rouet?
No, who were, he thought were going to be good.
He subsidized them.
No, no, you're not looking in the right place.
All right, you look for it.
It's funny, I was looking for that one the other day and couldn't find it.
I think it's beautiful.
It is lovely.
I think it's nicer than that.
It's one of those French kids.
I just took it by, I wasn't thinking of the artist or anything about the book.
I think it's, what is it, Monique Martin.
Monique Martin, M-A-R-T-E-N.
Yeah, she may have done that.
Yeah.
It's a nice, I like the Giacometti.
G-I-A-C-O-M-E-T-T-I, right?
Yeah.
Giacometti.
You know those screeny things.
Manic-mature.
Manic-monic-mature.
How do we spell that?
What do you think?
Matthew.
Oh, Matthew.
M-A-T-H-I-E-U?
Yeah.
Where's the cover for this, Sam?
Right there.
Is that it, no?
No.
No, it is.
There you go.
Thank you.
Well, tomorrow I'm going down to the University of Chicago and then back to the Newberry.
Oh, Newberry.
You'll have a wonderful time.
I was there most of today.
Isn't that great?
Yeah.
Isn't that magnificent?
Miro did this book.
Miro.
Yeah.
M-I-R-O.
Oh, you get all of them here.
He signed it.
Mm-hmm.
Tara did and he did.
Tara is the binder?
No, he's the author.
Mero did, well, let's see, who did the binder?
LaRue.
He was just a kid.
It's curious, isn't it, how it used wood in there?
Oh, that's wood inlaid?
Yeah, mm-hmm.
You name him.
In the 70s,
I'd leave Europe broke.
Unfortunately, I didn't have to pay for a while.
You didn't have to pay for a while.
That's good.
Oh, that's nice.
Well, I've enjoyed this.
Well, so it is.